The Project Gutenberg eBook of Address
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Address
        delivered in Craigie Hall, Edinburgh, February 24th, 1871

Author: Josephine Elizabeth Grey Butler

Release date: February 11, 2025 [eBook #75348]

Language: English

Original publication: Manchester: Ireland & Co., printers, 1871

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADDRESS ***





                                ADDRESS,
                              DELIVERED IN
                        CRAIGIE HALL, EDINBURGH,
                          FEBRUARY 24TH, 1871.


                                    BY
                           JOSEPHINE E. BUTLER.


     PRINTED, BY REQUEST, FOR _PRIVATE CIRCULATION_ AMONG FRIENDS IN
                                SCOTLAND.


                      PRICE ONE SHILLING PER DOZEN.
 To be had at the Central Office, 280, South Hill, Park Road, Liverpool.


                               MANCHESTER:
                  A. IRELAND & CO., PRINTERS, PALL MALL.
                                  1871.




                                ADDRESS.


Once when I was in Paris, I saw in a gallery a picture, which taught me
a lesson. It was a picture of Saint Marguerite, as the representative of
purity. She was very frail and youthful-looking, but, nevertheless, was
seen advancing in the attitude of a conqueror, trampling upon a hideous
dragon. The contrast between the gentle lady, in her pure white dress,
and the disgusting creature beneath her feet, was striking. The dragon,
the embodiment of some foul impurity, wickedness, and cruelty, was
enraged at its conqueror, but terrified too, wallowing on the ground,
breathing forth fire and venom, as hideous a monster as you can
conceive. St. Marguerite had no look of fear, nay, not even of disgust,
on her calm face, which was turned straight heavenward; and her fair
feet, stepping with a conqueror’s tread on the rough scales of the
prostrate monster, were not the least soiled by his vileness, but
remained as white as her heart was pure. This picture carried my
thoughts away to many a struggle which the world has witnessed between
good and evil, and it taught me to remember that when God sends forth
his messengers to combat impurity in its most hideous forms, these
messengers, weak though they be, need never doubt his power to keep them
unharmed. There is no evil in the world so great that God cannot raise
up to meet it a corresponding beauty and glory, which will blaze it out
of countenance. But mark me, friends, in order to escape unhurt, we must
oppose and tread upon the evil. If we merely look on at this unclean
monster, wondering at him, amazed, we shall be the worse for it. It is
the very pain and vigour, and humble trust in God, induced by
opposition, which enable us to rise above hurtful influences. It _is_
possible to rise above all such hurtful influences, above the horror and
disgust, and to attain to a region in which pure and elevating thoughts
alone prevail. This is of God’s goodness, who gives us armour fitted for
the battle.

I was asked this morning when it was that my thoughts were first
directed to this subject concerning which we are met together. As I am
here among friends and fellow-workers only, I may answer this question,
which is personal to myself. It is many years ago that I first became
acquainted with this system as it existed in Paris. I was one of those
persons—they were few, I believe—who read that very brief debate in the
House of Commons in 1866, when Mr. Henley and Mr. Ayrton alone, but
clearly and boldly, entered their protest. It was in that year that the
knowledge first broke upon me that this system, which I had so long
regarded with horror, had actually found a footing in our England. It
seemed to me as if a dark cloud were hanging on the horizon, threatening
our land. The depression which took possession of my mind was
overwhelming. A few days ago I found a record of those days, in an old
manuscript book long laid aside. In turning over its leaves, I found a
note of that debate in the house, the date, and a written expression,
which I had since forgotten, of a presentiment which at that time filled
my mind, that in some way or other I should be called to meet this evil
thing face to face—a trembling presentiment, which I could not escape
from, that, do what I would, I myself must enter into this cloud. I find
there recorded also a brief prayer, beseeching that if I must descend
into this darkness, that divine hand, whose touch is health and
strength, would hold mine fast in the darkness. I can recollect going
out into the garden, hoping that the sight of the flowers and blue sky
might banish the mental pain, but it clung too fast for a time for any
outward impression to remove it; and I envied the sparrows upon the
garden walk, because they had not minds and souls capable of torment
like mine. But _now_, when I look back, I see that that prayer has been
heard—the divine hand has held mine—often when I knew it not. And,
friends, God can give more than power to bear the pain; there is a
positive _joy_ in His service, and in any warfare in which He who
conquered sin and death and hell goes before us, and is our reward.

In England the aspect of the question before us, which affects most
strongly the masses of the working-class electors, is the constitutional
aspect. Even apart from the moral considerations involved, which are by
far the most important, the working men will wage war to the death
against this legislation, on account of its unconstitutional character;
and it is not, you may suppose, as a merely theoretic iniquity which
these practical men oppose it. It comes home to them very closely; they
see at once the dangers which threaten their own homes first, and the
whole commonwealth ultimately, through the admission of a principle into
our penal legislation which is directly and violently opposed to the
principles of the English constitution. Their instincts on this subject
are more keen than are those of the upper classes; this keenness of
perception arises mainly from the fact that they, not being sheltered by
rank, position, or wealth, have no guarantee of liberty, and of penal
justice, except what is found in the bulwarks of that constitution which
these Acts of Parliament have broken down.

I will presently briefly recount to you the main features of those just
criminal laws which Englishmen have lived under hitherto. Scotch laws
differ, I believe, in many respects from English laws; and it may be
that there is not among Scotch working men that deep attachment to the
Constitution which I find in the English, though I believe the Scotchman
has quite as strong a passion for freedom, and would be found to be
stronger on the moral argument. It is well that we should understand
clearly the illegal character of the Acts we oppose. I have been the
more deeply impressed with the importance of this aspect of the matter,
by reading the almost universal and powerful testimony of our great
lawyers and historians to the danger of introducing, in any single
instance, a lax, vicious, or unjust principle into our criminal code,
and to the moral and social evils which such an introduction necessarily
involves. Niebuhr, De Tocqueville, Guizot, Hallam, Lieber, Creasy,
Mackintosh, Blackstone, and a host of others, have again and again
pointed out that upon the justice and purity of the penal legislation of
a country the political wellbeing of that country mainly depends. The
consideration of this subject has induced in me the deep conviction that
public worship and the teaching of the Bible in a country where laws are
corrupt, and freedom insecure, will do little more than to keep
conscience alive in a remnant as it were, a minority of protestors,
becoming yearly more saddened and more feeble amidst the corruption of
social life through the sure and subtle teaching of the laws and public
institutions; it will do little more than create an antagonism in the
whole of society, between Christianity and the educational influence of
public law and custom. The purity of our laws, then, is of the very
highest importance in every aspect, political, social and moral. Again,
if any great purification of our laws is to be brought about, as I trust
it is to be brought about, at this anxious crisis of our nation’s
history, I, for my part, am deeply convinced, it cannot be achieved
except through a mighty awakening of the conscience of the
people—through a baptism into fresh spiritual life—through a great
stirring up of hearts to prayer and to action. Day by day, as I work in
this cause, it is more deeply impressed on my mind that we need a very
great reviving from on high. Since I came to Scotland this thought has
never been absent from my mind for a moment, night or day. My soul
travails in pain up to this hour, wishing and longing for that
outpouring of God’s Spirit, that breath of heaven which, my friends, I
declare to you I believe to be our only hope, in this our day, of
preventing our country from entering upon the first step towards speedy
national decline and dissolution; and it is a cause of grief and pain to
me that I can find no words in which to convey to you the strength of
that conviction which is laid upon my heart, and of that motive which
impels me forward as by the force of an internal fire which burns
without ceasing. I resolved before coming here this evening that I would
be bold, and that, though some here might perhaps think me fanatical, I
would tell you frankly out of my heart what I wish for, what I think we
need, and more—what I believe God will grant us. There is, to my mind, a
cloud of blessing hanging over our land, which will not long remain a
_little_ cloud, but will cover the sky. The enemy we have to contend
with is materialism, productive of a despotic absolutism, in one form or
other. The evil we are combating has its root in a deep scepticism as to
the possibility of virtue, and in the denial of eternal principles.
Therefore it is that we can only combat it, and its manifestations in
our laws and institutions, by the power and Spirit of God visiting once
more in an unusual degree this vexed land of ours.

Before pointing out, then, the corrupt tendencies of some of our modern
legislation, I will sketch to you, in the words of a great legal writer,
the main characteristics of just criminal jurisprudence, begging you
never to forget that while the Contagious Diseases Acts have been
imposed upon us in the name of merely sanitary and economical
regulations, they are, _in fact_, grave penal enactments—they have
introduced a great and serious change into our criminal jurisprudence.
This legal writer says—“The characteristics of a just, fair, and sound
penal trial (which characteristics are invariable in essence, and hold
good for all time) are as follows: No intimidation before the trial, no
attempt by artifice to induce the prisoner to confess, or criminate
himself; the fullest possible realisation of the principle that every
man must be held innocent until he is _proved_ to be guilty; bail; a
total discarding of the principle, that the more heinous the imputed
crime, the less ought to be the protection of the prisoner, but, on the
contrary, the adoption of the reverse; a distinct indictment, and the
acquaintance of the prisoner with it a long enough time beforehand to
give him time for preparing the defence: the accusatorial process, with
jury and publicity; counsel and defence for the prisoner; a distinct
theory of evidence (such as is defined by our statutes); no _hearsay_
testimony: a verdict upon such evidence alone; the accusation not to be
made by the _executive_.” Now this definition of a just penal trial has
hitherto been strictly adhered to in every case of moral and legal guilt
involving severe penalties. I could point out to you—(but you can see it
for yourselves)—how in _every one_ of these particulars the Contagious
Diseases Acts depart from the characteristics of a fair, just, and sound
penal trial. In the matter of mere economical laws there is no harm in
the fact of the accusation being made by the executive, indeed it is
needful—as for instance, when the policeman is the person who accuses a
cab-driver of driving recklessly; but when it comes to a matter of such
awful seriousness as that of a woman’s honour, involving loss of
character, which character is often, to a poor woman, her sole earthly
property, her only possession and capital; involving, moreover, the
penalties of personal assault, of a nature inadmissible hitherto in law
even in the case of proved outrageous guilt; of imprisonment and of
public registration as an infamous person; when it comes to this, I say,
it is an awful thing to put the accusation in the power of the
executive—that executive being the secret police, paid by the State, for
the sole business of detecting and hunting down suspected or unchaste
women. Again, the evil is aggravated by the fact that no other witness
to the guilt of the woman is required, except the government spy, and
that he, by this law, is not required to bring forward any overt act on
the part of his prisoner, or one iota of positive proof, but is only
required to believe and swear that the woman has a certain purpose or
intention.

If you doubt, read the Act carefully for yourself, and read the accounts
of proceedings under the Act. Again, and this is all important, the
denial of jury trial is cardinal to the very existence of these Acts.
Thus while to male criminals all the safeguards of penal law are
granted, as indeed they _ought_ to be, women are deprived of every one
of these safeguards under these Acts. Now even supposing that none but
the most guilty of the outcast class were brought under the Acts, the
Acts still remain an extreme injustice, and an aggression upon our
constitution, fraught with danger to the commonwealth; for, as
Chancellor Hobart said, “an element of license introduced into our
criminal code is the first step towards the destruction of the liberty
for _all_.” I will not dwell on other points, as for instance the
enforced self-crimination of the women, the dispensing, often, with the
formality even of a Justice, but will pass on.

My recent inquiries on these matters have made me very sorrowful, as a
lover of my country, and not only of womankind. There are other Acts of
Parliament now in force, and several others I fear about to be passed,
the tendency of which is in every case more or less unconstitutional,
and more or less demoralising, using these words in a general sense.
This type of legislation seems to me to flow from _one_ source. I
scarcely know how to designate that source. It is clumsy and despotic;
and, though I have no doubt wellintentioned, it tends to the steady
increase of the criminal class, by the rapid creation of new crimes, new
offences, followed by new pains and penalties. It tends to bring us back
to the old pantheistic State worship, to the substitution of the will of
the State for individual conscience, and to that cruellest of all
tyrannies which De Tocqueville shadows forth in his pages on the
despotism of the future, the despotism which may exist with democratic
institutions. This species of legislation assumes the right to coerce
human beings to any extent which may seem to minister to a given
material end, or to be temporarily expedient. It is stringent, punitive,
and arbitrary. It is unchristian in the sense that it practically denies
the possibility of moral renovation, and cuts off the means of rising
from the stage of criminality to that of a reinstated membership of
society. It deals out more and more punishment, more and more penalties,
more and more espionage. It, in fact, legislates more and more for
persons, as if they were “physical facts,” and not “moral agents.” It
defies the instinct of freedom in man, and ignores the power of renewal
in human character. The broad principles of our Constitution are so
glorious in their acknowledgment of the dignity and worth of human
beings, that wherever this new legislation takes root, it is obliged to
do so outside of the Constitution, so to speak, or in direct violation
of its principles. To the class of laws of which I speak belongs the
Habitual Criminals Bill, which even now has begun to bring forth vicious
fruit, to fill our streets with spies, and to drive men to despair.

Again, there is the Pedlars Licensing Bill, which forbids a poor man to
get a license to sell anything who may have been formerly committed for
a legal offence, and which in fact says to a man, “You have sinned once,
you shall not henceforward be allowed to pursue an honest trade.”
Pre-eminent among such legislation stand the Acts against which we are
contending, in this particular of branding those once fallen, and
assigning them to the rank of professional and marked criminals.

But I must here point out very emphatically that the Contagious Diseases
Acts stand alone in one sense, inasmuch as they embody a far deeper
iniquity than any of these other laws, and directly violate the law of
God, by offering protection to a vice which in opposition to that law
they pronounce to be necessary, and inasmuch as, while they cruelly
brand the class to whom they apply, they at the same time give to the
awful traffic which this class pursues the dignity of a recognised,
legitimate, and even protected industry.

It should be one of the aims of wise legislation to throw wide open the
door of recovery to the lapsed classes; and motives even of
self-interest should prompt legislators to endeavour to reinstate every
criminal who has endured his legal punishment. The element, which I have
tried to indicate, embodied in some of our recent legislation, tends to
create a large class of criminals and outlaws, of sullen and despairing
people, lost to self-respect, and for ever hunted by a watchful police.
We are being hurried into fearful dangers. It has appeared to me at
times as if we were smitten with a curse, a judicial blindness, which is
leading a Parliament, nominally the most liberal we have ever had, to
inaugurate a reign of materialism and despotism. We know the effects of
the growth of a proletariate class in ancient Rome and in other
countries. We are rapidly creating at this moment a proletariate class,
and the creation of such a class ensures sooner or later the smothering
of a nation in its own mud. I hold in my hand an Act of Parliament,
called “A Bill for the better protection of infant life,” which to some
extent illustrates what I have been saying. I do not wish to be
understood to condemn absolutely all such legislation, but it is
impossible not to be struck with the fact that this Bill, the “Habitual
Drunkards Bill,” and others which I have mentioned have not in them one
particle of _prevention_. These Acts of Parliament assume that we are to
acquiesce in the present state of England as its normal state; they
assume that we are to continue to have so many thousands of paupers, so
many thousands of habitual criminals, of outcast women, of drunkards,
&c., &c. Measures for dealing with these classes as they now exist may
be necessary; but, while they are enacted, common sense requires, and
surely the country will demand, that measures for _preventing_ these
enormous evils shall at least keep pace with measures for regulating
them. A measure, for instance, is passed for licensing baby-farming, and
for punishing infanticide, but nothing is done to increase the
responsibility of the fathers of illegitimate children, and the seducers
of girls who are minors are still left unpunished by law. Little or
nothing has yet been done to lessen the temptations to drunkenness,
while expensive provision is to be made for those who have become
confirmed in that vice.

Now the spirit of the teaching of Christ is the very opposite of that
which animates so much of this legislation. It is said of God, “He
giveth liberally and upbraideth not;” but man gives grudgingly,
upbraiding all the time. The Christian religion teaches that we shall
forgive a fallen brother not once but many times, and that forgiveness
shall be practically proved by granting an open path to recovery, that
it shall not be a forgiveness followed by perpetual espionage,
suspicion, and the ban of society fastened upon the once fallen for the
rest of their lives. I am not insisting that the Christian rule is to be
followed out to the letter in penal legislation, but I maintain that
legislation which violently adopts principles the very opposite of
Christian comes from an evil source, and will be followed by disastrous
consequences.

The principle of arbitrary compulsion embodied in some of our _sanatory_
Acts is fraught with danger. The medical and sanatory measures embodied
in such Acts may in themselves be excellent, but they are for the most
part grounded on opinion only—the opinion sometimes of a mere
clique,—which opinion has none of the authority of those eternal
principles of right and wrong which are written within the human
conscience. Wherefore, by the creation of a multitude of technical
crimes through the multiplication of these compulsory-sanatory and other
Acts, the criminal class is enormously increased, and to some extent the
mind is demoralised, while the body may or may not be kept in health.
The forcible doctoring of the people, whether they will or no, is, as a
matter of mere policy, a most dangerous experiment. The magisterial
powers now granted to State doctors, the amount of domiciliary
visitation already legalised for police and medical men, to which the
families of the poor have to submit, are not likely to make the people
in love with the laws, or to induce in them a readiness to help their
operation; and if the people at large do not cheerfully help the action
of any law, that law must come to end either by dying a natural death or
by revolution. Much sullenness and revengefulness are even now being
bred in the minds of large sections of our working men by the action of
some of these stringent criminal-making laws; whereas it should be the
policy of a wise government to secure the co-operation of this vast and
powerful portion of our population in the maintenance of law and order.

There is another evil incidental to the enforcement of these multiplied
enactments which are now so rapidly following one another. All these
laws are administered by the central authority, which, from London,
stretches its hand over the vast populations of our great cities. This
gradually increasing centralisation overrides municipal authority,
represses corporate freedom, and tends to deaden and stupefy the
political life and self-governing power of our great provincial
capitals. The local self-government of our country has ever been the
object of the admiration of thoughtful foreigners, who attribute to it
much of the manly character, the respect for law, and the readiness of
resource in emergencies which characterise our countrymen. But all these
things are struck at by this threatening imperialism, which works the
ruin of corporate freedom as much as that of individual virtue and
liberty, by treating the subject as a mere child or chattel, and
imposing a uniform rule upon all alike.

The new forthcoming Sanatory Bill is one which ought to be jealously
watched by the people. It seems likely to involve uniformity of
prescription in matters where such uniformity is least wise, and where
the power of self-regulation is most wholesome, as well as to increase
the magisterial powers of State doctors to an extent hitherto unknown.

The influence of women and their faith in the recoverability of human
nature are needed in these legislative matters. Our male legislators are
apt to ride rough-shod over us in matters of domestic detail. Their
heavy-handed legislation is applied now not only to matters of imperial
interest, but to everything which most nearly concerns our conscience
and feelings. It seems to me that we women shall soon have to fight for
the last inch of ground left us;—not for our civil rights only, but for
our hearths, our homes, our beds, our babies, our very persons. The
crudeness of intellect of some of our young male legislators needs to be
corrected by the wisdom of the thoughtful matrons of England. A young
M.P. said to me lately, “We shall do no good at all until we make
poverty a crime; disease is already made a crime in some cases, and
poverty ought to be so also.” I did not answer him, but in my heart I
said, “Thou fool!”

Such are some of the dangers before us. It has lately been suggested by
several gentlemen who are alive to this subject, that it may be
desirable and necessary to form some sort of a Covenant or League, of a
wide and national character, for the protection of freedom and virtue as
its general object, and in particular to observe vigilantly, and examine
strictly, every proposal and act of the legislature, especially such as
emanate from certain favoured cliques or professions, and to secure that
nothing passes into law which has not the sanction of the whole nation,
marked by open debate in Parliament, and by a majority of votes in a
House where there is more than a mere fraction of members present. It
has been suggested that no penal measures, involving extensive
interference with the liberty of the subject, or measures sanctioning
the erection of new tribunals for the assigning of grave and terrible
penalties, shall in future be enacted except where two-thirds, or at
least some reasonably large proportion of the House are present. It is a
rule, in many private and public associations, that no grave or
important changes or measures shall be made or enacted except in the
presence of a very large proportion of the members, constituting a
quorum. It would surely be a very right and natural demand on the part
of the people of England (with the warning they have now before their
eyes of the secret passing of the Contagious Diseases Acts) that
Parliament should never again make any great change in our penal code,
or infringe upon constitutional principles, in the name of sanitary
improvements, medical necessities, or any other thing, except by means
of such a parliamentary quorum as would satisfy the nation.

Any national league, such as has been suggested, for the defence of the
constitution, of liberty, and of morality, would of course be composed
both of men and women. Women are becoming rapidly educated in all these
matters, and their vigilance would naturally exceed even that of men,
for most of these threatening tyrannies fall _first_, if not
exclusively, on women and children.

I know not what work God may have in store for us, dear friends, but
this I know, that it is not for any small end that He has called our
Association together, a mighty band throughout the kingdom, united with
one heart in the presence of a common danger. He has not called up all
these rapidly-formed and grave friendships, this loving co-operation and
powerful mutual help, for any end or aim inadequate to so great an
instrument. I believe that the repeal of the Contagious Diseases Act,
which is our immediate object, is only a small part of the work He has
designed for us. I know not what that work may be; but this is sure,
that God knows and that he is guiding us. I believe that the materialism
of the day and the principle which opposes that materialism are about to
meet and to try their strength in a deadly encounter, and that we have a
great and holy work before us. We must be filled with high courage,
hope, and stern resolve. Think what a machinery we have now for work!
Our branch societies, our local secretaries, our power of concentration
on a given point at a given moment, our organisation generally,
resembles a great telegraphic system which is a swift and formidable
power. But our power is not in the machinery; it is in the living
principle which runs like lightning through this great telegraphic
system.

I know there is abundant life in Scotland, but I venture to beseech you,
friends, on behalf of England, which needs your help, as well as of your
own country, to pray and seek for a redoubling of that life; for surely
God is about to do great things. The power of evil is very awful, but
greater is He who is with us than they who are against us. All cannot
work actively for the ends we have in view, but all can pray, and

      “More things are done by prayer than this world dreams of.”


               A. Ireland and Co., Printers, Manchester.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADDRESS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


